<DOC>
<DOCNO> FBIS3-10491 </DOCNO>
<HT>    "cr00000015494001" </HT>


<HEADER>
<DATE1>   18 March 1994 </DATE1>
Article Type:FBIS 
DUE TO COPYRIGHT OR OTHER RESTRICTIONS THE FOLLOWING 
ITEM IS INTENDED FOR USE ONLY BY U.S. GOVERNMENT 
CONSUMERS. IT IS BASED ON FOREIGN MEDIA CONTENT AND 
BEHAVIOR AND IS ISSUED WITHOUT COORDINATION WITH OTHER 
U.S. GOVERNMENT COMPONENTS. 
Document Type:FBIS TRENDS-17MAR94-JORDAN-SAUDI ARABIA 
<H3> <TI>      Saudi Snub of King Husayn Dashes Reconciliation Hopes </TI></H3>


</HEADER>


<TEXT>
SUMMARY 

                               Despite persistent Jordanian efforts to repair relations with 
Saudi Arabia--seriously strained since the Gulf crisis--King 
Husayn's religious pilgrimage to Mecca and Medina on 8 March 
yielded a sharp rebuff when King Fahd pointedly failed to receive 
Husayn and his top-level delegation.  Indicating official 
Jordanian embarrassment over the Saudi snub, subsequent Jordanian 
media treatment of the visit suggests an effort to limit the 
political fallout by putting the best face possible on the visit. 

                           END SUMMARY 

   Although King Husayn officially traveled to Saudi Arabia to 
perform the 'umra, or minor pilgrimage, he evidently hoped to 
effect a public reconciliation with Fahd and overcome Saudi anger 
over Husayn's alleged sympathy for Iraq during the Gulf crisis. 
Indicative of the trip's political dimension, a large delegation 
accompanied the king on his first visit to Saudi Arabia following 
a four-year hiatus. In addition to Princes 'Abdallah, Talal, and 
Ghazi; the prime minister; the chief of the Royal Court; the 
king's adviser; the chief chamberlain; and the king's private 
secretary, the delegation included the chairman of the Joint 
Chiefs of Staff and "a number of top state and military 
officials" (Amman radio, 8 March). 
   Moreover, in the months prior to King Husayn's arrival in Saudi 
Arabia on 8 March, the Jordanian leadership made many flattering 
and conciliatory references to Saudi Arabia, revealing Amman's 
strong desire for a rapid reconciliation and laying the 
groundwork for the king's visit. 
   --During a news conference in Washington in January, the king 
said he hoped Amman-Riyadh relations would "return to their 
warmth."  Although he has always stopped short of an official, 
public apology for Jordan's refusal to join the international 
coalition against Iraq--something Riyadh evidently expects as a 
condition for restoring ties--Husayn said that he hoped "our 
brethren in Saudi Arabia will realize that we never meant them 
any harm, nor did we cause them any harm at all" (Amman TV, 27 
January). 
   --In a departure from previous Jordanian criticism of Saudi 
sponsorship of renovation projects for Islamic shrines in 
Jerusalem (See Note 1), Crown Prince Hassan welcomed Saudi 
Arabia's announced campaign to raise funds for the renovation of 
the Dome of the Rock and the al-Aqsa mosques, lavishing praise on 
the "initiative" by King Fahd, which "clearly contributes to 
realizing Arab solidarity" (Amman radio, 22 February).  Hassan's 
remarks were echoed by the daily Al-Dustur, which hailed the 
"well-timed Saudi step" (23 February). 
   (Note 1) In May 1992, Jordan's information minister responded to 
news of a Saudi donation to UNESCO on behalf of Jerusalem's 
Islamic shrines with a warning against "any attempt to weaken the 
legitimacy of the Jordanian role in Jerusalem" (Amman radio, 20 
May 92).  Likewise, the English-language weekly The Star 
criticized the Saudi move as "myopic and rash" (21-27 May 92), 
while the weekly Shihan denounced Riyadh's contribution to the 
shrines as "a direct threat to Jerusalem and its Arab character" 
(16 May 92). 
   At the time of the trip itself, monitored reports on Husayn's 
pilgrimage broadcast by Jordan's state-run radio and television 
refrained from discussing the political potential of the visit, 
focusing instead on factual accounts of the king's religious 
activities.  However, articles appearing in the semi-independent 
press during the king's pilgrimage undoubtedly fueled speculation 
about a Saudi-Jordanian reconciliation. 
   --A column in the daily Sawt al-Sha'b indicated optimistic 
expectations, stating that "there is no denying we entertain high 
hopes" for a reconciliation, and that "we fervently hope to see 
Amman and Riyadh embrace in a long hug after a long 
estrangement."   The column also suggested that Arabs would 
suffer "further ignominy, humiliation, and division" without 
moves toward reconciliation (9 March). 
   --On the day of King Husayn's departure for Jeddah, the weekly 
Al-'Ahd, organ of the conservative al-'Ahd political party, 
speculated about "the meetings that will be held" during the 
king's visit, adding that Jordanian "nationalists" had "hope and 
confidence in our ability to put the Gulf crisis behind us."  The 
article underscored "the big role the Saudi brothers can play" in 
giving Arab-Israeli peace negotiations added impetus (8 March). 
   --An editorial in the daily Al-Ra'y on 9 March--evidently 
published prior to the news that Fahd did not meet Husayn- 
-optimistically opined that the king's minor pilgrimage would not 
be "limited to the religious aspect in terms of its importance," 
and anticipated that the Jordanian and Saudi "brothers" would 
find the "right moment to meet, settle differences, and reaffirm 
that they have absorbed the lessons of past stages and the 
dangers of each upcoming stage." 

   Damage Control 

   Smarting from the Saudi snub and sensitive to possible public 
disappointment, the Jordanian government has not been observed to 
comment officially on the trip.  Media reports on the visit have 
been meager, although this was partially because of the non- 
publication of most Jordanian newspapers over the 'Id al-Fitr 
holiday.  Those reports that disclosed official disappointment 
with the trip cited only unnamed government sources, while other 
articles evidently sought to mask the negative outcome by playing 
up the religious nature of the king's sojourn.  Still other 
reports claimed favorable results from the trip, giving King 
Husayn credit for his initiative and indicating that the ball was 
now in the Saudi court. 
   --The English-language daily Jordan Times cited a source "close 
to the palace" as expressing disappointment that "the king was 
reaching out in reconciliation, but King Fahd did not respond." 
Although there was no monitored official confirmation of a 
planned Fahd-Husayn meeting, the Times cited official sources as 
having told the paper "privately" that the two kings had been 
slated to meet on 8 March for the first time since the outbreak 
of the Gulf crisis.  Another anonymous "well-placed source" cited 
by the Times said the king was aware his trip to Saudi Arabia 
would be a "purely spiritual visit."  Nonetheless, the same 
official credited the king with having broken "a psychological 
barrier" with Saudi Arabia by making the trip after four years of 
staying away (10 March). 
   --The weekly Akhbar Al-Usbu' published an unsigned article 
playing down the disappointing outcome of Husayn's visit, and 
giving the king credit for his effort.  Jordan, it said, had 
chosen to rise "above the pan-Arab wounds to heal the rift which 
afflicted the Arab homeland after the Gulf war, for the sake of 
restoring Arab solidarity and reactivating joint Arab action that 
can confront the serious challenges threatening the Arab and 
Islamic nation."  The king's "gesture," it noted, was "not new," 
but stemmed from "the continuous role the Hashemites have played 
in unifying the Arabs and Muslims throughout the ages" (10 
March). 

   Saudi Media Response 

   In line with the government's silence, official Saudi media were 
not observed to report or comment on King Husayn's arrival, 
pilgrimage activities, or departure.  Domestic Saudi newspapers 
were similarly observed to contain no mention of the king's 
visit.  Curiously, two London-based Saudi-owned papers--which 
exercise somewhat more editorial flexibility than their domestic 
counterparts--evidently anticipated that a Fahd-Husayn meeting 
would occur, perhaps influenced by speculation on the matter 
within the diplomatic community.  Al-Sharq Al-Awsat on 8 March 
quoted King Husayn's alleged "personal apologies to King Fahd" 
for their adversarial Gulf war relationship,  while Al-Hayah on 9 
March actually reported that King Fahd had "received the 
Jordanian monarch" the previous evening "in holy Mecca." 

   Implications 

   The public optimism regarding hopes for a reconciliation with 
Saudi Arabia appears to have embarrassed the government in the 
wake of the king's return to Jordan without having met with King 
Fahd.  Although prospects for a reconciliation were never 
officially confirmed, the widespread media speculation clearly 
indicated that a Fahd-Husayn meeting had been expected by the 
government--particularly since Fahd had received former Gulf war 
adversary PLO Chairman 'Arafat during the latter's minor 
pilgrimage in January.  Nevertheless, Fahd's decision not to 
receive Husayn, as well as the complete silence of Saudi Arabia's 
official media, suggest that Saudi Arabia will expect further 
measures--such as a more explicit public expression of Jordanian 
contrition for its stance during the Gulf war--if the 
longstanding impasse is to be broken.  Following this episode, 
any further attempts by King Husayn to mend fences with Saudi 
Arabia will likely be through private and diplomatic channels, 
and will carry a low media profile--at least until the prospects 
for success are guaranteed by Riyadh. 
(AUTHOR:  MURRAY.  QUESTIONS AND/OR COMMENTS, PLEASE CALL CHIEF, 
NEAR EAST ANALYSIS BRANCH (703) 733-6094.) 
ENEAG/BIETZ CS 18/0041z mar 

</TEXT>

</DOC>
